The Story of the Third Calendar, Son of a King


My story, said the Third Calender, is quite different from those of my
two friends.  It was fate that deprived them of the sight of their
right eyes, but mine was lost by my own folly.

My name is Ahab, and I am the son of a king called Cassib, who reigned
over a large kingdom, which had for its capital one of the finest
seaport towns in the world.

When I succeeded to my father's throne my first care was to visit the
provinces on the mainland, and then to sail to the numerous islands
which lay off the shore, in order to gain the hearts of my subjects.
These voyages gave me such a taste for sailing that I soon determined
to explore more distant seas, and commanded a fleet of large ships to
be got ready without delay.  When they were properly fitted out I
embarked on my expedition.

For forty days wind and weather were all in our favour, but the next
night a terrific storm arose, which blew us hither and thither for ten
days, till the pilot confessed that he had quite lost his bearings.
Accordingly a sailor was sent up to the masthead to try to catch a
sight of land, and reported that nothing was to be seen but the sea and
sky, except a huge mass of blackness that lay astern.

On hearing this the pilot grew white, and, beating his breast, he
cried, "Oh, sir, we are lost, lost!" till the ship's crew trembled at
they knew not what.  When he had recovered himself a little, and was
able to explain the cause of his terror, he replied, in answer to my
question, that we had drifted far out of our course, and that the
following day about noon we should come near that mass of darkness,
which, said he, is nothing but the famous Black Mountain.  This
mountain is composed of adamant, which attracts to itself all the iron
and nails in your ship; and as we are helplessly drawn nearer, the
force of attraction will become so great that the iron and nails will
fall out of the ships and cling to the mountain, and the ships will
sink to the bottom with all that are in them.  This it is that causes
the side of the mountain towards the sea to appear of such a dense
blackness.

As may be supposed--continued the pilot--the mountain sides are very
rugged, but on the summit stands a brass dome supported on pillars, and
bearing on top the figure of a brass horse, with a rider on his back.
This rider wears a breastplate of lead, on which strange signs and
figures are engraved, and it is said that as long as this statue
remains on the dome, vessels will never cease to perish at the foot of
the mountain.

So saying, the pilot began to weep afresh, and the crew, fearing their
last hour had come, made their wills, each one in favour of his fellow.

At noon next day, as the pilot had foretold, we were so near to the
Black Mountain that we saw all the nails and iron fly out of the ships
and dash themselves against the mountain with a horrible noise.  A
moment after the vessels fell asunder and sank, the crews with them.  I
alone managed to grasp a floating plank, and was driven ashore by the
wind, without even a scratch.  What was my joy on finding myself at the
bottom of some steps which led straight up the mountain, for there was
not another inch to the right or the left where a man could set his
foot.  And, indeed, even the steps themselves were so narrow and so
steep that, if the lightest breeze had arisen, I should certainly have
been blown into the sea.

When I reached the top I found the brass dome and the statue exactly as
the pilot had described, but was too wearied with all I had gone
through to do more than glance at them, and, flinging myself under the
dome, was asleep in an instant.  In my dreams an old man appeared to me
and said, "Hearken, Ahab!  As soon as thou art awake dig up the ground
underfoot, and thou shalt find a bow of brass and three arrows of lead.
Shoot the arrows at the statue, and the rider shall tumble into the
sea, but the horse will fall down by thy side, and thou shalt bury him
in the place from which thou tookest the bow and arrows.  This being
done the sea will rise and cover the mountain, and on it thou wilt
perceive the figure of a metal man seated in a boat, having an oar in
each hand.  Step on board and let him conduct thee; but if thou
wouldest behold thy kingdom again, see that thou takest not the name of
Allah into thy mouth."

Having uttered these words the vision left me, and I woke, much
comforted.  I sprang up and drew the bow and arrows out of the ground,
and with the third shot the horseman fell with a great crash into the
sea, which instantly began to rise, so rapidly, that I had hardly time
to bury the horse before the boat approached me.  I stepped silently in
and sat down, and the metal man pushed off, and rowed without stopping
for nine days, after which land appeared on the horizon.  I was so
overcome with joy at this sight that I forgot all the old man had told
me, and cried out, "Allah be praised!  Allah be praised!"

The words were scarcely out of my mouth when the boat and man sank from
beneath me, and left me floating on the surface.  All that day and the
next night I swam and floated alternately, making as well as I could
for the land which was nearest to me.  At last my strength began to
fail, and I gave myself up for lost, when the wind suddenly rose, and a
huge wave cast me on a flat shore.  Then, placing myself in safety, I
hastily spread my clothes out to dry in the sun, and flung myself on
the warm ground to rest.

Next morning I dressed myself and began to look about me.  There seemed
to be no one but myself on the island, which was covered with fruit
trees and watered with streams, but seemed a long distance from the
mainland which I hoped to reach.  Before, however, I had time to feel
cast down, I saw a ship making directly for the island, and not knowing
whether it would contain friends or foes, I hid myself in the thick
branches of a tree.

The sailors ran the ship into a creek, where ten slaves landed,
carrying spades and pickaxes.  In the middle of the island they
stopped, and after digging some time, lifted up what seemed to be a
trapdoor.  They then returned to the vessel two or three times for
furniture and provisions, and finally were accompanied by an old man,
leading a handsome boy of fourteen or fifteen years of age.  They all
disappeared down the trapdoor, and after remaining below for a few
minutes came up again, but without the boy, and let down the trapdoor,
covering it with earth as before.  This done, they entered the ship and
set sail.

As soon as they were out of sight, I came down from my tree, and went
to the place where the boy had been buried.  I dug up the earth till I
reached a large stone with a ring in the centre.  This, when removed,
disclosed a flight of stone steps which led to a large room richly
furnished and lighted by tapers.  On a pile of cushions, covered with
tapestry, sat the boy.  He looked up, startled and frightened at the
sight of a stranger in such a place, and to soothe his fears, I at once
spoke:  "Be not alarmed, sir, whoever you may be.  I am a king, and the
son of a king, and will do you no hurt.  On the contrary, perhaps I
have been sent here to deliver you out of this tomb, where you have
been buried alive."

Hearing my words, the young man recovered himself, and when I had
ended, he said, "The reasons, Prince, that have caused me to be buried
in this place are so strange that they cannot but surprise you.  My
father is a rich merchant, owning much land and many ships, and has
great dealings in precious stones, but he never ceased mourning that he
had no child to inherit his wealth.

"At length one day he dreamed that the following year a son would be
born to him, and when this actually happened, he consulted all the wise
men in the kingdom as to the future of the infant.  One and all they
said the same thing.  I was to live happily till I was fifteen, when a
terrible danger awaited me, which I should hardly escape.  If, however,
I should succeed in doing so, I should live to a great old age.  And,
they added, when the statue of the brass horse on the top of the
mountain of adamant is thrown into the sea by Ahab, the son of Cassib,
then beware, for fifty days later your son shall fall by his hand!

"This prophecy struck the heart of my father with such woe, that he
never got over it, but that did not prevent him from attending
carefully to my education till I attained, a short time ago, my
fifteenth birthday.  It was only yesterday that the news reached him
that ten days previously the statue of brass had been thrown into the
sea, and he at once set about hiding me in this underground chamber,
which was built for the purpose, promising to fetch me out when the
forty days have passed.  For myself, I have no fears, as Prince Ahab is
not likely to come here to look for me."

I listened to his story with an inward laugh as to the absurdity of my
ever wishing to cause the death of this harmless boy, whom I hastened
to assure of my friendship and even of my protection; begging him, in
return, to convey me in his father's ship to my own country.  I need
hardly say that I took special care not to inform him that I was the
Ahab whom he dreaded.

The day passed in conversation on various subjects, and I found him a
youth of ready wit and of some learning.  I took on myself the duties
of a servant, held the basin and water for him when he washed, prepared
the dinner and set it on the table.  He soon grew to love me, and for
thirty-nine days we spent as pleasant an existence as could be expected
underground.

The morning of the fortieth dawned, and the young man when he woke gave
thanks in an outburst of joy that the danger was passed.  "My father
may be here at any moment," said he, "so make me, I pray you, a bath of
hot water, that I may bathe, and change my clothes, and be ready to
receive him."

So I fetched the water as he asked, and washed and rubbed him, after
which he lay down again and slept a little.  When he opened his eyes
for the second time, he begged me to bring him a melon and some sugar,
that he might eat and refresh himself.

I soon chose a fine melon out of those which remained, but could find
no knife to cut it with.  "Look in the cornice over my head," said he,
"and I think you will see one."  It was so high above me, that I had
some difficulty in reaching it, and catching my foot in the covering of
the bed, I slipped, and fell right upon the young man, the knife going
straight into his heart.

At this awful sight I shrieked aloud in my grief and pain.  I threw
myself on the ground and rent my clothes and tore my hair with sorrow.
Then, fearing to be punished as his murderer by the unhappy father, I
raised the great stone which blocked the staircase, and quitting the
underground chamber, made everything fast as before.

Scarcely had I finished when, looking out to sea, I saw the vessel
heading for the island, and, feeling that it would be useless for me to
protest my innocence, I again concealed myself among the branches of a
tree that grew near by.

The old man and his slaves pushed off in a boat directly the ship
touched land, and walked quickly towards the entrance to the
underground chamber; but when they were near enough to see that the
earth had been disturbed, they paused and changed colour.  In silence
they all went down and called to the youth by name; then for a moment I
heard no more.  Suddenly a fearful scream rent the air, and the next
instant the slaves came up the steps, carrying with them the body of
the old man, who had fainted from sorrow!  Laying him down at the foot
of the tree in which I had taken shelter, they did their best to
recover him, but it took a long while.  When at last he revived, they
left him to dig a grave, and then laying the young man's body in it,
they threw in the earth.

This ended, the slaves brought up all the furniture that remained
below, and put it on the vessel, and breaking some boughs to weave a
litter, they laid the old man on it, and carried him to the ship, which
spread its sails and stood out to sea.

So once more I was quite alone, and for a whole month I walked daily
over the island, seeking for some chance of escape.  At length one day
it struck me that my prison had grown much larger, and that the
mainland seemed to be nearer.  My heart beat at this thought, which was
almost too good to be true.  I watched a little longer: there was no
doubt about it, and soon there was only a tiny stream for me to cross.

Even when I was safe on the other side I had a long distance to go on
the mud and sand before I reached dry ground, and very tired I was,
when far in front of me I caught sight of a castle of red copper,
which, at first sight, I took to be a fire.  I made all the haste I
could, and after some miles of hard walking stood before it, and gazed
at it in astonishment, for it seemed to me the most wonderful building
I had ever beheld.  While I was still staring at it, there came towards
me a tall old man, accompanied by ten young men, all handsome, and all
blind of the right eye.

Now in its way, the spectacle of ten men walking together, all blind of
the right eye, is as uncommon as that of a copper castle, and I was
turning over in my mind what could be the meaning of this strange fact,
when they greeted me warmly, and inquired what had brought me there.  I
replied that my story was somewhat long, but that if they would take
the trouble to sit down, I should be happy to tell it them.  When I had
finished, the young men begged that I would go with them to the castle,
and I joyfully accepted their offer.  We passed through what seemed to
me an endless number of rooms, and came at length into a large hall,
furnished with ten small blue sofas for the ten young men, which served
as beds as well as chairs, and with another sofa in the middle for the
old man.  As none of the sofas could hold more than one person, they
bade me place myself on the carpet, and to ask no questions about
anything I should see.

After a little while the old man rose and brought in supper, which I
ate heartily, for I was very hungry.  Then one of the young men begged
me to repeat my story, which had struck them all with astonishment, and
when I had ended, the old man was bidden to "do his duty," as it was
late, and they wished to go to bed.  At these words he rose, and went
to a closet, from which he brought out ten basins, all covered with
blue stuff.  He set one before each of the young men, together with a
lighted taper.

When the covers were taken off the basins, I saw they were filled with
ashes, coal-dust, and lamp-black. The young men mixed these all
together, and smeared the whole over their heads and faces.  They then
wept and beat their breasts, crying, "This is the fruit of idleness,
and of our wicked lives."

This ceremony lasted nearly the whole night, and when it stopped they
washed themselves carefully, and put on fresh clothes, and lay down to
sleep.

All this while I had refrained from questions, though my curiosity
almost seemed to burn a hole in me, but the following day, when we went
out to walk, I said to them, "Gentlemen, I must disobey your wishes,
for I can keep silence no more.  You do not appear to lack wit, yet you
do such actions as none but madmen could be capable of.  Whatever
befalls me I cannot forbear asking, `Why you daub your faces with
black, and how it is you are all blind of one eye?'" But they only
answered that such questions were none of my business, and that I
should do well to hold my peace.

During that day we spoke of other things, but when night came, and the
same ceremony was repeated, I implored them most earnestly to let me
know the meaning of it all.

"It is for your own sake," replied one of the young men, "that we have
not granted your request, and to preserve you from our unfortunate
fate.  If, however, you wish to share our destiny we will delay no
longer."

I answered that whatever might be the consequence I wished to have my
curiosity satisfied, and that I would take the result on my own head.
He then assured me that, even when I had lost my eye, I should be
unable to remain with them, as their number was complete, and could not
be added to.  But to this I replied that, though I should be grieved to
part company with such honest gentlemen, I would not be turned from my
resolution on that account.

On hearing my determination my ten hosts then took a sheep and killed
it, and handed me a knife, which they said I should by-and-by find
useful.  "We must sew you into this sheep-skin," said they, "and then
leave you.  A fowl of monstrous size, called a roc, will appear in the
air, taking you to be a sheep.  He will snatch you up and carry you
into the sky, but be not alarmed, for he will bring you safely down and
lay you on the top of a mountain.  When you are on the ground cut the
skin with the knife and throw it off.  As soon as the roc sees you he
will fly away from fear, but you must walk on till you come to a castle
covered with plates of gold, studded with jewels.  Enter boldly at the
gate, which always stands open, but do not ask us to tell you what we
saw or what befel us there, for that you will learn for yourself.  This
only we may say, that it cost us each our right eye, and has imposed
upon us our nightly penance."

After the young gentlemen had been at the trouble of sewing the
sheep-skin on me they left me, and retired to the hall.  In a few
minutes the roc appeared, and bore me off to the top of the mountain in
his huge claws as lightly as if I had been a feather, for this great
white bird is so strong that he has been known to carry even an
elephant to his nest in the hills.

The moment my feet touched the ground I took out my knife and cut the
threads that bound me, and the sight of me in my proper clothes so
alarmed the roc that he spread his wings and flew away.  Then I set out
to seek the castle.

I found it after wandering about for half a day, and never could I have
imagined anything so glorious.  The gate led into a square court, into
which opened a hundred doors, ninety-nine of them being of rare woods
and one of gold.  Through each of these doors I caught glimpses of
splendid gardens or of rich storehouses.

Entering one of the doors which was standing open I found myself in a
vast hall where forty young ladies, magnificently dressed, and of
perfect beauty, were reclining.  As soon as they saw me they rose and
uttered words of welcome, and even forced me to take possession of a
seat that was higher than their own, though my proper place was at
their feet.  Not content with this, one brought me splendid garments,
while another filled a basin with scented water and poured it over my
hands, and the rest busied themselves with preparing refreshments.
After I had eaten and drunk of the most delicate food and rarest wines,
the ladies crowded round me and begged me to tell them all my
adventures.

By the time I had finished night had fallen, and the ladies lighted up
the castle with such a prodigious quantity of tapers that even day
could hardly have been brighter.  We then sat down to a supper of dried
fruits and sweetmeats, after which some sang and others danced.  I was
so well amused that I did not notice how the time was passing, but at
length one of the ladies approached and informed me it was midnight,
and that, as I must be tired, she would conduct me to the room that had
been prepared for me.  Then, bidding me good-night, I was left to sleep.

I spent the next thirty-nine days in much the same way as the first,
but at the close of that time the ladies appeared (as was their custom)
in my room one morning to inquire how I had slept, and instead of
looking cheerful and smiling they were in floods of tears.  "Prince,"
said they, "we must leave you, and never was it so hard to part from
any of our friends.  Most likely we shall never see you again, but if
you have sufficient self-command perhaps we may yet look forward to a
meeting."

"Ladies," I replied, "what is the meaning of these strange words--I
pray you to tell me?"

"Know then," answered one of them, "that we are all princesses--each a
king's daughter.  We live in this castle together, in the way that you
have seen, but at the end of every year secret duties call us away for
the space of forty days.  The time has now come; but before we depart,
we will leave you our keys, so that you may not lack entertainment
during our absence.  But one thing we would ask of you.  The Golden
Door, alone, forbear to open, as you value your own peace, and the
happiness of your life.  That door once unlocked, we must bid you
farewell for ever."

Weeping, I assured them of my prudence, and after embracing me
tenderly, they went their ways.

Every day I opened two or three fresh doors, each of which contained
behind it so many curious things that I had no chance of feeling dull,
much as I regretted the absence of the ladies.  Sometimes it was an
orchard, whose fruit far exceeded in bigness any that grew in my
father's garden.  Sometimes it was a court planted with roses,
jessamine, dafeodils, hyacinths and anemones, and a thousand other
flowers of which I did not know the names.  Or again, it would be an
aviary, fitted with all kinds of singing birds, or a treasury heaped up
with precious stones; but whatever I might see, all was perfect of its
own sort.

Thirty-nine days passed away more rapidly than I could have conceived
possible, and the following morning the princesses were to return to
the castle.  But alas!  I had explored every corner, save only the room
that was shut in by the Golden Door, and I had no longer anything to
amuse myself with.  I stood before the forbidden place for some time,
gazing at its beauty; then a happy inspiration struck me, that because
I unlocked the door it was not necessary that I should enter the
chamber.  It would be enough for me to stand outside and view whatever
hidden wonders might be therein.

Thus arguing against my own conscience, I turned the key, when a smell
rushed out that, pleasant though it was, overcame me completely, and I
fell fainting across the threshold.  Instead of being warned by this
accident, directly I came to myself I went for a few moments into the
air to shake of the effects of the perfume, and then entered boldly.  I
found myself in a large, vaulted room, lighted by tapers, scented with
aloes and ambergris, standing in golden candle-sticks, whilst gold and
silver lamps hung from the ceiling.

Though objects of rare workmanship lay heaped around me, I paid them
scant attention, so much was I struck by a great black horse which
stood in one corner, the handsomest and best-shaped animal I had ever
seen.  His saddle and bridle were of massive gold, curiously wrought;
one side of his trough was filled with clean barley and sesame, and the
other with rose water.  I led the animal into the open air, and then
jumped on his back, shaking the reins as I did so, but as he never
stirred, I touched him lightly with a switch I had picked up in his
stable.  No sooner did he feel the stroke, than he spread his wings
(which I had not perceived before), and flew up with me straight into
the sky.  When he had reached a prodigious height, he next darted back
to earth, and alighted on the terrace belonging to a castle, shaking me
violently out of the saddle as he did so, and giving me such a blow
with his tail, that he knocked out my right eye.

Half-stunned as I was with all that had happened to me, I rose to my
feet, thinking as I did so of what had befallen the ten young men, and
watching the horse which was soaring into the clouds.  I left the
terrace and wandered on till I came to a hall, which I knew to have
been the one from which the roc had taken me, by the ten blue sofas
against the wall.

The ten young men were not present when I first entered, but came in
soon after, accompanied by the old man.  They greeted me kindly, and
bewailed my misfortune, though, indeed, they had expected nothing less.
"All that has happened to you," they said, "we also have undergone, and
we should be enjoying the same happiness still, had we not opened the
Golden Door while the princesses were absent.  You have been no wiser
than we, and have suffered the same punishment.  We would gladly
receive you among us, to perform such penance as we do, but we have
already told you that this is impossible.  Depart, therefore, from
hence and go to the Court of Bagdad, where you shall meet with him that
can decide your destiny." They told me the way I was to travel, and I
left them.

On the road I caused my beard and eyebrows to be shaved, and put on a
Calender's habit.  I have had a long journey, but arrived this evening
in the city, where I met my brother Calenders at the gate, being
strangers like myself.  We wondered much at one another, to see we were
all blind of the same eye, but we had no leisure to discourse at length
of our common calamities.  We had only so much time as to come hither
to implore those favours which you have been generously pleased to
grant us.

He finished, and it was Zobeida's turn to speak:  "Go wherever you
please," she said, addressing all three.  "I pardon you all, but you
must depart immediately out of this house."

