Noureddin and the Fair Persian


Balsora was the capital of a kingdom long tributary to the caliph.
During the time of the Caliph Haroun-al-Raschid the king of Balsora,
who was his cousin, was called Zinebi.  Not thinking one vizir enough
for the administration of his estates he had two, named Khacan and
Saouy.

Khacan was kind, generous, and liberal, and took pleasure in obliging,
as far as in him lay, those who had business with him.  Throughout the
entire kingdom there was no one who did not esteem and praise him as he
deserved.

Saouy was quite a different character, and repelled everyone with whom
he came in contact; he was always gloomy, and, in spite of his great
riches, so miserly that he denied himself even the necessaries of life.
What made him particularly detested was the great aversion he had to
Khacan, of whom he never ceased to speak evil to the king.

One day, while the king amused himself talking with his two vizirs and
other members of the council, the conversation turned on female slaves.
While some declared that it sufficed for a slave to be beautiful,
others, and Khacan was among the number, maintained that beauty alone
was not enough, but that it must be accompanied by wit, wisdom,
modesty, and, if possible, knowledge.

The king not only declared himself to be of this opinion, but charged
Khacan to procure him a slave who should fulfil all these conditions.
Saouy, who had been of the opposite side, and was jealous of the honour
done to Khacan, said, "Sire, it will be very difficult to find a slave
as accomplished as your Majesty desires, and, if she is to be found,
she will be cheap if she cost less than 10,000 gold pieces."

"Saouy," answered the king, "you seem to find that a very great sum.
For you it may be so, but not for me."

And forthwith he ordered his grand treasurer, who was present, to send
10,000 gold pieces to Khacan for the purchase of the slave.

As soon, then, as Khacan returned home he sent for the dealers in
female slaves, and charged them directly they had found such a one as
he described to inform him.  They promised to do their utmost, and no
day passed that they did not bring a slave for his inspection but none
was found without some defect.

At length, early one morning, while Khacan was on his way to the king's
palace, a dealer, throwing himself in his way, announced eagerly that a
Persian merchant, arrived late the previous evening, had a slave to
sell whose wit and wisdom were equal to her incomparable beauty.

Khacan, overjoyed at this news, gave orders that the slave should be
brought for his inspection on his return from the palace.  The dealer
appearing at the appointed hour, Khacan found the slave beautiful
beyond his expectations, and immediately gave her the name of "The Fair
Persian."

Being a man of great wisdom and learning, he perceived in the short
conversation he had with her that he would seek in vain another slave
to surpass her in any of the qualities required by the king, and
therefore asked the dealer what price the merchant put upon her.

"Sir," was the answer, "for less than 10,000 gold pieces he will not
let her go; he declares that, what with masters for her instruction,
and for bodily exercises, not to speak of clothing and nourishment, he
has already spent that sum upon her.  She is in every way fit to be the
slave of a king; she plays every musical instrument, she sings, she
dances, she makes verses, in fact there is no accomplishment in which
she does not excel."

Khacan, who was better able to judge of her merits than the dealer,
wishing to bring the matter to a conclusion, sent for the merchant, and
said to him, "It is not for myself that I wish to buy your slave, but
for the king.  Her price, however, is too high."

"Sir," replied the merchant, "I should esteem it an honour to present
her to his Majesty, did it become a merchant to do such a thing.  I ask
no more than the sum it has cost me to make her such as she is."

Khacan, not wishing to bargain, immediately had the sum counted out,
and given to the merchant, who before withdrawing said:

"Sir, as she is destined for the king, I would have you observe that
she is extremely tired with the long journey, and before presenting her
to his Majesty you would do well to keep her a fortnight in your own
house, and to see that a little care is bestowed upon her.  The sun has
tanned her complexion, but when she has been two or three times to the
bath, and is fittingly dressed, you will see how much her beauty will
be increased."

Khacan thanked the merchant for his advice, and determined to follow
it.  He gave the beautiful Persian an apartment near to that of his
wife, whom he charged to treat her as befitting a lady destined for the
king, and to order for her the most magnificent garments.

Before bidding adieu to the fair Persian, he said to her: "No happiness
can be greater than what I have procured for you; judge for yourself,
you now belong to the king.  I have, however, to warn you of one thing.
I have a son, who, though not wanting in sense, is young, foolish, and
headstrong, and I charge you to keep him at a distance."

The Persian thanked him for his advice, and promised to profit by it.

Noureddin--for so the vizir's son was named--went freely in and out of
his mother's apartments.  He was young, well-made and agreeable, and
had the gift of charming all with whom he came in contact.  As soon as
he saw the beautiful Persian, though aware that she was destined for
the king, he let himself be carried away by her charms, and determined
at once to use every means in his power to retain her for himself.  The
Persian was equally captivated by Noureddin, and said to herself:  "The
vizir does me too great honour in buying me for the king.  I should
esteem myself very happy if he would give me to his son."

Noureddin availed himself of every opportunity to gaze upon her beauty,
to talk and laugh with her, and never would have left her side if his
mother had not forced him.

Some time having elapsed, on account of the long journey, since the
beautiful Persian had been to the bath, five or six days after her
purchase the vizir's wife gave orders that the bath should be heated
for her, and that her own female slaves should attend her there, and
after-wards should array her in a magnificent dress that had been
prepared for her.

Her toilet completed, the beautiful Persian came to present herself to
the vizir's wife, who hardly recognised her, so greatly was her beauty
increased.  Kissing her hand, the beautiful slave said: "Madam, I do
not know how you find me in this dress that you have had prepared for
me; your women assure me that it suits me so well that they hardly knew
me.  If it is the truth they tell me, and not flattery, it is to you I
owe the transformation."

"My daughter," answered the vizir's wife, "they do not flatter you.  I
myself hardly recognised you.  The improvement is not due to the dress
alone, but largely to the beautifying effects of the bath.  I am so
struck by its results, that I would try it on myself."

Acting forthwith on this decision she ordered two little slaves during
her absence to watch over the beautiful Persian, and not to allow
Noureddin to enter should he come.

She had no sooner gone than he arrived, and not finding his mother in
her apartment, would have sought her in that of the Persian.  The two
little slaves barred the entrance, saying that his mother had given
orders that he was not to be admitted.  Taking each by an arm, he put
them out of the anteroom, and shut the door.  Then they rushed to the
bath, informing their mistress with shrieks and tears that Noureddin
had driven them away by force and gone in.

This news caused great consternation to the lady, who, dressing herself
as quickly as possible, hastened to the apartment of the fair Persian,
to find that Noureddin had already gone out.  Much astonished to see
the vizir's wife enter in tears, the Persian asked what misfortune had
happened.

"What!" exclaimed the lady, "you ask me that, knowing that my son
Noureddin has been alone with you?"

"But, madam," inquired the Persian, "what harm is there in that?"

"How!  Has my husband not told you that you are destined for the king?"

"Certainly, but Noureddin has just been to tell me that his father has
changed his mind and has bestowed me upon him.  I believed him, and so
great is my affection for Noureddin that I would willingly pass my life
with him."

"Would to heaven," exclaimed the wife of the vizir, "that what you say
were true; but Noureddin has deceived you, and his father will
sacrifice him in vengeance for the wrong he has done."

So saying, she wept bitterly, and all her slaves wept with her.

Khacan, entering shortly after this, was much astonished to find his
wife and her slaves in tears, and the beautiful Persian greatly
perturbed.  He inquired the cause, but for some time no answer was
forthcoming.  When his wife was at length sufficiently calm to inform
him of what had happened, his rage and mortification knew no bounds.
Wringing his hands and rending his beard, he exclaimed:

"Wretched son! thou destroyest not only thyself but thy father.  The
king will shed not only thy blood but mine."  His wife tried to console
him, saying:  "Do not torment thyself.  With the sale of my jewels I
will obtain 10,000 gold pieces, and with this sum you will buy another
slave."

"Do not suppose," replied her husband, "that it is the loss of the
money that affects me.  My honour is at stake, and that is more
precious to me than all my wealth.  You know that Saouy is my mortal
enemy.  He will relate all this to the king, and you will see the
consequences that will ensue."

"My lord," said his wife, "I am quite aware of Saouy's baseness, and
that he is capable of playing you this malicious trick.  But how can he
or any one else know what takes place in this house?  Even if you are
suspected and the king accuses you, you have only to say that, after
examining the slave, you did not find her worthy of his Majesty.
Reassure yourself, and send to the dealers, saying that you are not
satisfied, and wish them to find you another slave."

This advice appearing reasonable, Khacan decided to follow it, but his
wrath against his son did not abate.  Noureddin dared not appear all
that day, and fearing to take refuge with his usual associates in case
his father should seek him there, he spent the day in a secluded garden
where he was not known.  He did not return home till after his father
had gone to bed, and went out early next morning before the vizir
awoke, and these precautions he kept up during an entire month.

His mother, though knowing very well that he returned to the house
every evening, dare not ask her husband to pardon him.  At length she
took courage and said:

"My lord, I know that a son could not act more basely towards his
father than Noureddin has done towards you, but after all will you now
pardon him?  Do you not consider the harm you may be doing yourself,
and fear that malicious people, seeking the cause of your estrangement,
may guess the real one?"

"Madam," replied the vizir, "what you say is very just, but I cannot
pardon Noureddin before I have mortified him as he deserves."

"He will be sufficiently punished," answered the lady, "if you do as I
suggest.  In the evening, when he returns home, lie in wait for him and
pretend that you will slay him.  I will come to his aid, and while
pointing out that you only yield his life at my supplications, you can
force him to take the beautiful Persian on any conditions you please."
Khacan agreed to follow this plan, and everything took place as
arranged.  On Noureddin's return Khacan pretended to be about to slay
him, but yielding to his wife's intercession, said to his son:

"You owe your life to your mother.  I pardon you on her intercession,
and on the conditions that you take the beautiful Persian for your
wife, and not your slave, that you never sell her, nor put her away."

Noureddin, not hoping for so great indulgence, thanked his father, and
vowed to do as he desired.  Khacan was at great pains frequently to
speak to the king of the difficulties attending the commission he had
given him, but some whispers of what had actually taken place did reach
Saouy's ears.

More than a year after these events the minister took a chill, leaving
the bath while still heated to go out on important business.  This
resulted in inflammation of the lungs, which rapidly increased.  The
vizir, feeling that his end was at hand, sent for Noureddin, and
charged him with his dying breath never to part with the beautiful
Persian.

Shortly afterwards he expired, leaving universal regret throughout the
kingdom; rich and poor alike followed him to the grave.  Noureddin
showed every mark of the deepest grief at his father's death, and for
long refused to see any one.  At length a day came when, one of his
friends being admitted, urged him strongly to be consoled, and to
resume his former place in society.  This advice Noureddin was not slow
to follow, and soon he formed little society of ten young men all about
his own age, with whom he spent all his time in continual feasting and
merry-making.

Sometimes the fair Persian consented to appear at these festivities,
but she disapproved of this lavish expenditure, and did not scruple to
warn Noureddin of the probable consequences.  He, however, only laughed
at her advice, saying, that his father had always kept him in too great
constraint, and that now he rejoiced at his new-found liberty.

What added to the confusion in his affairs was that he refused to look
into his accounts with his steward, sending him away every time he
appeared with his book.

"See only that I live well," he said, "and do not disturb me about
anything else."

Not only did Noureddin's friends constantly partake of his hospitality,
but in every way they took advantage of his generosity; everything of
his that they admired, whether land, houses, baths, or any other source
of his revenue, he immediately bestowed on them.  In vain the Persian
protested against the wrong he did himself; he continued to scatter
with the same lavish hand.

Throughout one entire year Noureddin did nothing but amuse himself, and
dissipate the wealth his father had taken such pains to acquire.  The
year had barely elapsed, when one day, as they sat at table, there came
a knock at the door.  The slaves having been sent away, Noureddin went
to open it himself.  One of his friends had risen at the same time, but
Noureddin was before him, and finding the intruder to be the steward,
he went out and closed the door.  The friend, curious to hear what
passed between them, hid himself behind the hangings, and heard the
following words:

"My lord," said the steward, "I beg a thousand pardons for interrupting
you, but what I have long foreseen has taken place.  Nothing remains of
the sums you gave me for your expenses, and all other sources of income
are also at end, having been transferred by you to others.  If you wish
me to remain in your service, furnish me with the necessary funds, else
I must withdraw."

So great was Noureddin's consternation that he had not a word to say in
reply.

The friend, who had been listening behind the curtain, immediately
hastened to communicate the news to the rest of the company.

"If this is so," they said, "we must cease to come here."

Noureddin re-entering at that moment, they plainly saw, in spite of his
efforts to dissemble, that what they had heard was the truth.  One by
one they rose, and each with a different excuse left the room, till
presently he found himself alone, though little suspecting the
resolution his friends had taken.  Then, seeing the beautiful Persian,
he confided to her the statement of the steward, with many expressions
of regret for his own carelessness.

"Had I but followed your advice, beautiful Persian," he said, "all this
would not have happened, but at least I have this consolation, that I
have spent my fortune in the company of friends who will not desert me
in an hour of need.  To-morrow I will go to them, and amongst them they
will lend me a sum sufficient to start in some business."

Accordingly next morning early Noureddin went to seek his ten friends,
who all lived in the same street.  Knocking at the door of the first
and chief, the slave who opened it left him to wait in a hall while he
announced his visit to his master.  "Noureddin!" he heard him exclaim
quite audibly.  "Tell him, every time he calls, that I am not at home."
The same thing happened at the second door, and also at the third, and
so on with all the ten.  Noureddin, much mortified, recognised too late
that he had confided in false friends, who abandoned him in his hour of
need.  Overwhelmed with grief, he sought consolation from the beautiful
Persian.

"Alas, my lord," she said, "at last you are convinced of the truth of
what I foretold.  There is now no other resource left but to sell your
slaves and your furniture."

First then he sold the slaves, and subsisted for a time on the
proceeds, after that the furniture was sold, and as much of it was
valuable it sufficed for some time.  Finally this resource also came to
an end, and again he sought counsel from the beautiful Persian.

"My lord," she said, "I know that the late vizir, your father, bought
me for 10,000 gold pieces, and though I have diminished in value since,
I should still fetch a large sum.  Do not therefore hesitate to sell
me, and with the money you obtain go and establish yourself in business
in some distant town."

"Charming Persian," answered Noureddin, "how could I be guilty of such
baseness?  I would die rather than part from you whom I love better
than my life."

"My lord," she replied, "I am well aware of your love for me, which is
only equalled by mine for you, but a cruel necessity obliges us to seek
the only remedy."

Noureddin, convinced at length of the truth of her words, yielded, and
reluctantly led her to the slave market, where, showing her to a dealer
named Hagi Hassan, he inquired her value.

Taking them into a room apart, Hagi Hassan exclaimed as soon as she had
unveiled, "My lord, is not this the slave your father bought for 10,000
pieces?"

On learning that it was so, he promised to obtain the highest possible
price for her.  Leaving the beautiful Persian shut up in the room
alone, he went out to seek the slave merchants, announcing to them that
he had found the pearl among slaves, and asking them to come and put a
value upon her.  As soon as they saw her they agreed that less than
4,000 gold pieces could not be asked.  Hagi Hassan, then closing the
door upon her, began to offer her for sale--calling out: "Who will bid
4,000 gold pieces for the Persian slave?"

Before any of the merchants had bid, Saouy happened to pass that way,
and judging that it must be a slave of extraordinary beauty, rode up to
Hagi Hassan and desired to see her.  Now it was not the custom to show
a slave to a private bidder, but as no one dared to disobey the vizir
his request was granted.

As soon as Saouy saw the Persian he was so struck by her beauty, that
he immediately wished to possess her, and not knowing that she belonged
to Noureddin, he desired Hagi Hassan to send for the owner and to
conclude the bargain at once.

Hagi Hassan then sought Noureddin, and told him that his slave was
going far below her value, and that if Saouy bought her he was capable
of not paying the money.  "What you must do," he said, "is to pretend
that you had no real intention of selling your slave, and only swore
you would in a fit of anger against her.  When I present her to Saouy
as if with your consent you must step in, and with blows begin to lead
her away."

Noureddin did as Hagi Hassan advised, to the great wrath of Saouy, who
riding straight at him endeavoured to take the beautiful Persian from
him by force.  Noureddin letting her go, seized Saouy's horse by the
bridle, and, encouraged by the applause of the bystanders, dragged him
to the ground, beat him severely, and left him in the gutter streaming
with blood.  Then, taking the beautiful Persian, he returned home
amidst the acclamations of the people, who detested Saouy so much that
they would neither interfere in his behalf nor allow his slaves to
protect him.

Covered from head to foot with mire and streaming with blood he rose,
and leaning on two of his slaves went straight to the palace, where he
demanded an audience of the king, to whom he related what had taken
place in these words:

"May it please your Majesty, I had gone to the slave market to buy
myself a cook.  While there I heard a slave being offered for 4,000
pieces.  Asking to see her, I found she was of incomparable beauty, and
was being sold by Noureddin, the son of your late vizir, to whom your
Majesty will remember giving a sum of 10,000 gold pieces for the
purchase of a slave.  This is the identical slave, whom instead of
bringing to your Majesty he gave to his own son.  Since the death of
his father this Noureddin has run through his entire fortune, has sold
all his possessions, and is now reduced to selling the slave.  Calling
him to me, I said:  "Noureddin, I will give you 10,000 gold pieces for
your slave, whom I will present to the king.  I will interest him at
the same time in your behalf, and this will be worth much more to you
than what extra money you might obtain from the merchants."  "Bad old
man," he exclaimed, "rather than sell my slave to you I would give her
to a Jew." "But, Noureddin," I remonstrated, "you do not consider that
in speaking thus you wrong the king, to whom your father owed
everything." This remonstrance only irritated him the more.  Throwing
himself on me like a madman, he tore me from my horse, beat me to his
heart's content, and left me in the state your Majesty sees."

So saying Saouy turned aside his head and wept bitterly.

The king's wrath was kindled against Noureddin.  He ordered the captain
of the guard to take with him forty men, to pillage Noureddin's house,
to rase it to the ground, and to bring Noureddin and the slave to him.
A doorkeeper, named Sangiar, who had been a slave of Khacan's, hearing
this order given, slipped out of the king's apartment, and hastened to
warn Noureddin to take flight instantly with the beautiful Persian.
Then, presenting him with forty gold pieces, he disappeared before
Noureddin had time to thank him.

As soon, then, as the fair Persian had put on her veil they fled
together, and had the good fortune to get out of the town without being
observed.  At the mouth of the Euphrates they found a ship just about
to start for Bagdad.  They embarked, and immediately the anchor was
raised and they set sail.

When the captain of the guard reached Noureddin's house he caused his
soldiers to burst open the door and to enter by force, but no trace was
to be found of Noureddin and his slave, nor could the neighbours give
any information about them.  When the king heard that they had escaped,
he issued a proclamation that a reward of 1,000 gold pieces would be
given to whoever would bring him Noureddin and the slave, but that, on
the contrary, whoever hid them would be severely punished.  Meanwhile
Noureddin and the fair Persian had safely reached Bagdad.  When the
vessel had come to an anchor they paid five gold pieces for their
passage and went ashore.  Never having been in Bagdad before, they did
not know where to seek a lodging.  Wandering along the banks of the
Tigris, they skirted a garden enclosed by a high wall.  The gate was
shut, but in front of it was an open vestibule with a sofa on either
side.  "Here," said Noureddin, "let us pass the night," and reclining
on the sofas they soon fell asleep.

Now this garden belonged to the Caliph.  In the middle of it was a vast
pavilion, whose superb saloon had eighty windows, each window having a
lustre, lit solely when the Caliph spent the evening there.  Only the
door-keeper lived there, an old soldier named Scheih Ibrahim, who had
strict orders to be very careful whom he admitted, and never to allow
any one to sit on the sofas by the door.  It happened that evening that
he had gone out on an errand.  When he came back and saw two persons
asleep on the sofas he was about to drive them out with blows, but
drawing nearer he perceived that they were a handsome young man and
beautiful young woman, and decided to awake them by gentler means.
Noureddin, on being awoke, told the old man that they were strangers,
and merely wished to pass the night there.  "Come with me," said Scheih
Ibrahim, "I will lodge you better, and will show you a magnificent
garden belonging to me." So saying the doorkeeper led the way into the
Caliph's garden, the beauties of which filled them with wonder and
amazement.  Noureddin took out two gold pieces, and giving them to
Scheih Ibrahim said,

"I beg you to get us something to eat that we may make merry together."
Being very avaricious, Scheih Ibrahim determined to spend only the
tenth part of the money and to keep the rest to himself.  While he was
gone Noureddin and the Persian wandered through the gardens and went up
the white marble staircase of the pavilion as far as the locked door of
the saloon.  On the return of Scheih Ibrahim they begged him to open
it, and to allow them to enter and admire the magnificence within.
Consenting, he brought not only the key, but a light, and immediately
unlocked the door.  Noureddin and the Persian entering, were dazzled
with the magnificence they beheld.  The paintings and furniture were of
astonishing beauty, and between each window was a silver arm holding a
candle.

Scheih Ibrahim spread the table in front of a sofa, and all three ate
together.  When they had finished eating Noureddin asked the old man to
bring them a bottle of wine.

"Heaven forbid," said Scheih Ibrahim, "that I should come in contact
with wine!  I who have four times made the pilgrimage to Mecca, and
have renounced wine for ever."

"You would, however, do us a great service in procuring us some," said
Noureddin.  "You need not touch it yourself.  Take the ass which is
tied to the gate, lead it to the nearest wine-shop, and ask some
passer-by to order two jars of wine; have them put in the ass's
panniers, and drive him before you.  Here are two pieces of gold for
the expenses."

At sight of the gold, Scheih Ibrahim set off at once to execute the
commission.  On his return, Noureddin said:  "We have still need of
cups to drink from, and of fruit, if you can procure us some." Scheih
Ibrahim disappeared again, and soon returned with a table spread with
cups of gold and silver, and every sort of beautiful fruit.  Then he
withdrew, in spite of repeated invitations to remain.

Noureddin and the beautiful Persian, finding the wine excellent, drank
of it freely, and while drinking they sang.  Both had fine voices, and
Scheih Ibrahim listened to them with great pleasure--first from a
distance, then he drew nearer, and finally put his head in at the door.
Noureddin, seeing him, called to him to come in and keep them company.
At first the old man declined, but was persuaded to enter the room, to
sit down on the edge of the sofa nearest the door, and at last to draw
closer and to seat himself by the beautiful Persian, who urged him so
persistently to drink her health that at length he yielded, and took
the cup she offered.

Now the old man only made a pretence of renouncing wine; he frequented
wine-shops like other people, and had taken none of the precautions
Noureddin had proposed.  Having once yielded, he was easily persuaded
to take a second cup, and a third, and so on till he no longer knew
what he was doing.  Till near midnight they continued drinking,
laughing, and singing together.

About that time the Persian, perceiving that the room was lit by only
one miserable tallow candle, asked Scheih Ibrahim to light some of the
beautiful candles in the silver arms.

"Light them yourself," answered the old man; "you are younger than I,
but let five or six be enough."

She did not stop, however, till she had lit all the eighty, but Scheih
Ibrahim was not conscious of this, and when, soon after that, Noureddin
proposed to have some of the lustres lit, he answered:

"You are more capable of lighting them than I, but not more than three."

Noureddin, far from contenting himself with three, lit all, and opened
all the eighty windows.

The Caliph Haroun-al-Raschid, chancing at that moment to open a window
in the saloon of his palace looking on the garden, was surprised to see
the pavilion brilliantly illuminated.  Calling the grand-vizir, Giafar,
he said to him:

"Negligent vizir, look at the pavilion, and tell me why it is lit up
when I am not there."

When the vizir saw that it was as the Caliph said, he trembled with
fear, and immediately invented an excuse.

"Commander of the Faithful," he said, "I must tell you that four or
five days ago Scheih Ibrahim told me that he wished to have an assembly
of the ministers of his mosque, and asked permission to hold it in the
pavilion.  I granted his request, but forgot since to mention it to
your Majesty."

"Giafar," replied the Caliph, "you have committed three faults--first,
in giving the permission; second, in not mentioning it to me; and
third, in not investigating the matter more closely.  For punishment I
condemn you to spend the rest of the night with me in company of these
worthy people.  While I dress myself as a citizen, go and disguise
yourself, and then come with me."

When they reached the garden gate they found it open, to the great
indignation of the Caliph.  The door of the pavilion being also open,
he went softly upstairs, and looked in at the half-closed door of the
saloon.  Great was his surprise to see Scheih Ibrahim, whose sobriety
he had never doubted, drinking and singing with a young man and a
beautiful lady.  The Caliph, before giving way to his anger, determined
to watch and see who the people were and what they did.

Presently Scheih Ibrahim asked the beautiful Persian if anything were
wanting to complete her enjoyment of the evening.

"If only," she said, "I had an instrument upon which I might play."

Scheih Ibrahim immediately took a lute from a cup-board and gave it to
the Persian, who began to play on it, singing the while with such skill
and taste that the Caliph was enchanted.  When she ceased he went
softly downstairs and said to the vizir:

"Never have I heard a finer voice, nor the lute better played.  I am
determined to go in and make her play to me."

"Commander of the Faithful," said the vizir, "if Scheih Ibrahim
recognises you he will die of fright."

"I should be sorry for that," answered the Caliph, "and I am going to
take steps to prevent it.  Wait here till I return."

Now the Caliph had caused a bend in the river to form a lake in his
garden.  There the finest fish in the Tigris were to be found, but
fishing was strictly forbidden.  It happened that night, however, that
a fisherman had taken advantage of the gate being open to go in and
cast his nets.  He was just about to draw them when he saw the Caliph
approaching.  Recognising him at once in spite of his disguise, he
threw himself at his feet imploring forgiveness.

"Fear nothing," said the Caliph, "only rise up and draw thy nets."

The fisherman did as he was told, and produced five or six fine fish,
of which the Caliph took the two largest.  Then he desired the
fisherman to change clothes with him, and in a few minutes the Caliph
was transformed into a fisherman, even to the shoes and the turban.
Taking the two fish in his hand, he returned to the vizir, who, not
recognising him, would have sent him about his business.  Leaving the
vizir at the foot of the stairs, the Caliph went up and knocked at the
door of the saloon.  Noureddin opened it, and the Caliph, standing on
the threshold, said:

"Scheih Ibrahim, I am the fisher Kerim.  Seeing that you are feasting
with your friends, I bring you these fish."

Noureddin and the Persian said that when the fishes were properly
cooked and dressed they would gladly eat of them.  The Caliph then
returned to the vizir, and they set to work in Scheih Ibrahim's house
to cook the fish, of which they made so tempting a dish that Noureddin
and the fair Persian ate of it with great relish.  When they had
finished Noureddin took thirty gold pieces (all that remained of what
Sangiar had given him) and presented them to the Caliph, who, thanking
him, asked as a further favour if the lady would play him one piece on
the lute.  The Persian gladly consented, and sang and played so as to
delight the Caliph.

Noureddin, in the habit of giving to others whatever they admired,
said, "Fisherman, as she pleases you so much, take her; she is yours."

The fair Persian, astounded that he should wish to part from her, took
her lute, and with tears in her eyes sang her reproaches to its music.

The Caliph (still in the character of fisherman) said to him, "Sir, I
perceive that this fair lady is your slave.  Oblige me, I beg you, by
relating your history."

Noureddin willingly granted this request, and recounted everything from
the purchase of the slave down to the present moment.

"And where do you go now?" asked the Caliph.

"Wherever the hand of Allah leads me," said Noureddin.

"Then, if you will listen to me," said the Caliph, "you will
immediately return to Balsora.  I will give you a letter to the king,
which will ensure you a good reception from him."

"It is an unheard-of thing," said Noureddin, "that a fisherman should
be in correspondence with a king."

"Let not that astonish you," answered the Caliph; "we studied together,
and have always remained the best of friends, though fortune, while
making him a king, left me a humble fisherman."

The Caliph then took a sheet of paper, and wrote the following letter,
at the top of which he put in very small characters this formula to
show that he must be implicitly obeyed:--"In the name of the Most
Merciful God.

"Letter of the Caliph Haroun-al-Raschid to the King of Balsora.

"Haroun-al-Raschid, son of Mahdi, sends this letter to Mohammed Zinebi,
his cousin.  As soon as Noureddin, son of the Vizir Khacan, bearer of
this letter, has given it to thee, and thou hast read it, take off thy
royal mantle, put it on his shoulders, and seat him in thy place
without fail.  Farewell."

The Caliph then gave this letter to Noureddin, who immediately set off,
with only what little money he possessed when Sangiar came to his
assistance.  The beautiful Persian, inconsolable at his departure, sank
on a sofa bathed in tears.

When Noureddin had left the room, Scheih Ibrahim, who had hitherto kept
silence, said:  "Kerim, for two miserable fish thou hast received a
purse and a slave.  I tell thee I will take the slave, and as to the
purse, if it contains silver thou mayst keep one piece, if gold then I
will take all and give thee what copper pieces I have in my purse."

Now here it must be related that when the Caliph went upstairs with the
plate of fish he ordered the vizir to hasten to the palace and bring
back four slaves bearing a change of raiment, who should wait outside
the pavilion till the Caliph should clap his hands.

Still personating the fisherman, the Caliph answered: "Scheih Ibrahim,
whatever is in the purse I will share equally with you, but as to the
slave I will keep her for myself.  If you do not agree to these
conditions you shall have nothing."

The old man, furious at this insolence as he considered it, took a cup
and threw it at the Caliph, who easily avoided a missile from the hand
of a drunken man.  It hit against the wall, and broke into a thousand
pieces.  Scheih Ibrahim, still more enraged, then went out to fetch a
stick.  The Caliph at that moment clapped his hands, and the vizir and
the four slaves entering took off the fisherman's dress and put on him
that which they had brought.

When Scheih Ibrahim returned, a thick stick in his hand, the Caliph was
seated on his throne, and nothing remained of the fisherman but his
clothes in the middle of the room.  Throwing himself on the ground at
the Caliph's feet, he said:  "Commander of the Faithful, your miserable
slave has offended you, and craves forgiveness."

The Caliph came down from his throne, and said:  "Rise, I forgive
thee." Then turning to the Persian he said:  "Fair lady, now you know
who I am; learn also that I have sent Noureddin to Balsora to be king,
and as soon as all necessary preparations are made I will send you
there to be queen.  Meanwhile I will give you an apartment in my
palace, where you will be treated with all honour."

At this the beautiful Persian took courage, and the Caliph was as good
as his word, recommending her to the care of his wife Zobeida.

Noureddin made all haste on his journey to Balsora, and on his arrival
there went straight to the palace of the king, of whom he demanded an
audience.  It was immediately granted, and holding the letter high
above his head he forced his way through the crowd.  While the king
read the letter he changed colour.  He would instantly have executed
the Caliph's order, but first he showed the letter to Saouy, whose
interests were equally at stake with his own.  Pretending that he
wished to read it a second time, Saouy turned aside as if to seek a
better light; unperceived by anyone he tore off the formula from the
top of the letter, put it to his mouth, and swallowed it.  Then,
turning to the king, he said:

"Your majesty has no need to obey this letter.  The writing is indeed
that of the Caliph, but the formula is absent.  Besides, he has not
sent an express with the patent, without which the letter is useless.
Leave all to me, and I will take the consequences."

The king not only listened to the persuasions of Saouy, but gave
Noureddin into his hands.  Such a severe bastinado was first
administered to him, that he was left more dead than alive; then Saouy
threw him into the darkest and deepest dungeon, and fed him only on
bread and water.  After ten days Saouy determined to put an end to
Noureddin's life, but dared not without the king's authority.  To gain
this end, he loaded several of his own slaves with rich gifts, and
presented himself at their head to the king, saying that they were from
the new king on his coronation.

"What!" said the king; "is that wretch still alive?  Go and behead him
at once.  I authorise you."

"Sire," said Saouy, "I thank your Majesty for the justice you do me.  I
would further beg, as Noureddin publicly affronted me, that the
execution might be in front of the palace, and that it might be
proclaimed throughout the city, so that no one may be ignorant of it."

The king granted these requests, and the announcement caused universal
grief, for the memory of Noureddin's father was still fresh in the
hearts of his people.  Saouy, accompanied by twenty of his own slaves,
went to the prison to fetch Noureddin, whom he mounted on a wretched
horse without a saddle.  Arrived at the palace, Saouy went in to the
king, leaving Noureddin in the square, hemmed in not only by Saouy's
slaves but by the royal guard, who had great difficulty in preventing
the people from rushing in and rescuing Noureddin.  So great was the
indignation against Saouy that if anyone had set the example he would
have been stoned on his way through the streets.  Saouy, who witnessed
the agitation of the people from the windows of the king's privy
chambers, called to the executioner to strike at once.  The king,
however, ordered him to delay; not only was he jealous of Saouy's
interference, but he had another reason.  A troop of horsemen was seen
at that moment riding at full gallop towards the square.  Saouy
suspected who they might be, and urged the king to give the signal for
the execution without delay, but this the king refused to do till he
knew who the horsemen were.

Now, they were the vizir Giafar and his suite arriving at full speed
from Bagdad.  For several days after Noureddin's departure with the
letter the Caliph had forgotten to send the express with the patent,
without which the letter was useless.  Hearing a beautiful voice one
day in the women's part of the palace uttering lamentations, he was
informed that it was the voice of the fair Persian, and suddenly
calling to mind the patent, he sent for Giafar, and ordered him to make
for Balsora with the utmost speed--if Noureddin were dead, to hang
Saouy; if he were still alive, to bring him at once to Bagdad along
with the king and Saouy.

Giafar rode at full speed through the square, and alighted at the steps
of the palace, where the king came to greet him.  The vizir's first
question was whether Noureddin were still alive.  The king replied that
he was, and he was immediately led forth, though bound hand and foot.
By the vizir's orders his bonds were immediately undone, and Saouy was
tied with the same cords.  Next day Giafar returned to Bagdad, bearing
with him the king, Saouy, and Noureddin.

When the Caliph heard what treatment Noureddin had received, he
authorised him to behead Saouy with his own hands, but he declined to
shed the blood of his enemy, who was forthwith handed over to the
executioner.  The Caliph also desired Noureddin to reign over Balsora,
but this, too, he declined, saying that after what had passed there he
preferred never to return, but to enter the service of the Caliph.  He
became one of his most intimate courtiers, and lived long in great
happiness with the fair Persian.  As to the king, the Caliph contented
himself with sending him back to Balsora, with the recommendation to be
more careful in future in the choice of his vizir.
